Contact Information
Dr. Mary Meagher
634 Cinnabar Basin Road
Gardiner, MT 59030


Collection Metadata
The data span 1970 through July 1997. There were four aerial surveys per year 
(Piper supercub, same pilot and observer with rare exceptions), weather and 
desired timing permitting from 1970 through 1990. Thereafter surveys increased 
to 9-10 per year, circumstances permitting. Flying weather required reasonably 
wind-free, clear-to-partly-cloudy conditions park-wide, beginning 0800-0900 
usually  to be ahead of the strong winds that often developed later in the day. 
Surveys most commonly began with the northern range and proceeded 
sequentially toward the east boundary and upper Lamar, Mirror Plateau and 
Pelican Valley, Hayden Valley, the Firehole, and the west side. However wind 
and/or ground-fog over open valleys sometimes required a change of route. The 
same factors occasionally dictated a survey could not be completed in one day, 
in which case the rest of the areas usually were flown the following day and the 
data melded for a single flight total. Thus certain flights numbers in the data set 
have observations on two dates.  Also, during the earlier years  the numbers 
observed on the northern range by an elk researcher occasionally  were used 
when the timing was suitable, rather than duplicate the effort. Surveys were 
intended to locate all visible bison with the exception of wandering bulls that were 
beyond the population-use areas in unknown and unpredictable sites. An 
exceptionally sharp-eyed pilot made the overall and calf counts. The observer  
cross-checked and recorded those numbers, group size and cohesiveness, 
separated animals and their locations, and general conditions, Miscellaneous 
data such as mortality, travel routes and timing, unusual habitat factors, etc. were 
noted on occasion. All initial data entries were recorded manually and transferred 
to field notebooks as soon as possible, usually the same day.


Reference Metadata


Year – Year of observation (70=1970, 71=1971…97=1997)

Month – Month of observation (1=Jan., 2=Feb.…12=Dec)

Day – Day within the month the observation was made (1-28,29,30,31)

Time – Approximate time during the day the observation was made.  

Flight – Ranked 1-151 by order of year, month, and day.

Location Metadata

EUTM - Map Coordinate east to west.

NUTM – Map Coordinate north to south.

Loc$ - General location of subset geographical areas of Yellowstone 
National Park including Northern, Pelican, Hayden, Firehole, and Westside.

Demographic Metadata

Bisontotal – Summation of all individual bison within a given observation 
(Bisontotal = bulls + calves + unknown)

Calves – Number of calves per observation.  Subset of Bisontotal.

Bulls – Number of bulls per observation.  Subset of Bisontotal.

Dispersion/Cohesion – Measure of distance between animals in a group.
1= Cluster Tight (.5 – 3 animal distances)
2= Medium (3 – 10 animal distances)
3=Loose (over 10 animal distances)

Groupshape - Geometric form of the group
1=globular
2=linear

Environment Metadata

Habitat1 – Primary habitat for observation space (approximately 1 km2)

Habitat2 – Secondary habitat for observation space 

Habitat3 – Tertiary habitat for observation space 

Habitat includes: 1=Sedge , 2=Upland , 3=Geothermal, 4=Trees, 5=subalpine, 
6=creek/river,7=road, 8=willows, 9=1988 forest burn, 10=feedground

Snowcover – A two dimensional aerial view of snow coverage across a 
landscape.  0=no snow, 1=patch snow (openings on geothermal, south facing 
exposures, and wind swept areas), and 2=snow covered landscapes.  

